one of the funny things about owning a
brain is that you have no control over
the things that it gathers and holds on
to the facts and the stories and as you
get older it only gets worse things
stick around for years sometimes before
you understand why you're interested in
them before you understand their import
to you here's three of mine when Richard
Fineman was a young boy in Queens he
went for a walk with his dad and his
wagon and a ball and he notice that when
he pulled the wagon the ball went to the
back of the wagon and he asked his dad
why does the ball go to the back of the
wagon and his dad said that's inertia he
said what's inertia and his dad said ah
inertia is the name that scientists give
to the phenomenon of the ball going to
the back of the wagon but in truth
nobody really knows Fineman went on to
earn degrees at MIT Princeton he solved
the Challenger disaster he ended up
winning the Nobel Prize in Physics for
his fine mint diagrams describing the
movement of subatomic particles and he
credits that conversation with his
father as giving him a sense that the
simplest questions could carry you out
to the edge of human knowledge and that
that's where he wanted to play and play
he did now Eratosthenes was the third
librarian at the great library at
Alexandria and he made many
contributions to science but the one he
is most remembered for began in a letter
that he received as the librarian from
the town of swen in' which was south of
alexandria the letter included this fact
that stuck in Eratosthenes mind and the
fact was that the writer said at noon on
the Solstice when he looked down this
deep well he could see his reflection at
the bottom and he could also see that
his head was blocking the Sun now I
should tell you the idea that
Christopher Columbus discovered that the
world is spherical is total bull it's
not true at all in fact everyone who was
educated understood that the world was
spherical since Aristotle's time and
Aristotle had proved it with a simple
observation he noticed that every time
you saw the Earth's shadow on the moon
it was circular and the only shape that
constantly creates a circular shadow is
a sphere QED the earth is round but
nobody knew how big it was until
Eratosthenes got this letter with
fact so he understood that the Sun was
directly above the city of sweatin
because looking down and well it was a
straight line all the way down the well
right past the guy's head up to the Sun
Eratosthenes knew another fact he knew
that a stick stuck in the ground in
Alexandria at the same time and the same
day at noon the Sun zenith on the
Solstice the Sun cast a shadow that
showed it was seven point two degrees
off-axis now if you know the
circumference of a circle and you have
two points on it all you need to know is
the distance between those two points
and you can extrapolate the
circumference 360 degrees divided by
seven point two equals 50 I know it's a
little bit of a round number and it
makes me suspicious of this story too
but it's a good story so we'll continue
with it he needed to know the distance
between swen --it and Alexandria which
is good because Eratosthenes was good at
geography in fact he invented the word
geography the road between Sweden and
Alexandria was a road of Commerce and
commerce needed to know how long it took
to get there it needed to know the exact
distance so he knew very precisely that
the distance between the two cities was
500 miles multiply that times 50 you get
25,000 which is within 1% of the actual
diameter of the earth he did this 2200
years ago now we live in an age where
multi-billion dollar pieces of machinery
are looking for the Higgs boson we're
discovering particles that may travel
faster than the speed of light and all
of these discoveries are made possible
by technology that's been developed in
the last few decades but for most of
human history we had to discover these
things using our eyes and our ears and
our minds armand fees Oh was an
experimental physicist in Paris his
specialty was actually refining and
confirming other people's results and
this might sound like a bit of an
also-ran
but in fact this is the soul of science
because there's no such thing as a fact
that cannot be independently
corroborated and he was familiar with
Galileo's experiments in trying to
determine whether or not light had a
speed so Galileo had worked out this
really wonderful experiment where he and
his assistant had a lamp each
I was holding a lamp and Galilei would
open his lamp and his assistant would
open his lamp and they got the timing
down really good
they just knew their timing and then
they stood at two hilltops two miles
distant and they did the same thing on
the assumption from Galileo that if
light had a discernable speed he'd
notice a delay in the light coming back
from his assistants lamp but light was
too fast for Galileo he was off by
several orders of magnitude when he
assumed that light was roughly ten times
as fast as the speed of sound
Fiza was aware of this experiment he
lived in Paris and he set up two
experimental stations roughly five and a
half miles distant in Paris and he
solved this problem of Galileo's and he
did it with a really relatively trivial
piece of equipment he did it with one of
these I'm going to put away the clicker
for a second because I want to engage
your brains in this so this is a toothed
wheel it's got a bunch of notches and
it's got a bunch of teeth this was fees
Oh solution to sending discrete pulses
of light he put a beam behind one of
these notches if I point a beam through
this notch at a mirror five miles away
that beam is bouncing off the mirror and
coming back to me through this knotch
but something interesting happens as he
spins the wheel faster he notices that
it seems like a door is starting to
close on the light beam that's coming
back to his eye why is that it's because
the pulse of light it's not coming back
through the same knotch
it's actually hitting a tooth and he
spins the wheel fast enough and he fully
occludes the light and then based on the
distance between the two stations and
the speed of his wheel and the number of
notches in the wheel he calculates the
speed of light to within 2% of its
actual value and he does this in 18-49
this is what really gets me going about
science whenever I'm having trouble
understanding a concept I go back and I
research the people that discovered that
concept I look at the story of how they
came to understand it and what happens
when you look at what the discoverers
were thinking about when they made their
discoveries as you understand that they
are not so different from us we are all
bags of meat and water we all start with
the same tools I love the idea that
different branch
of science are called fields of study
most people think of Sciences of closed
blackbox and in fact it is an open field
and we are all explorers the people that
made these discoveries just thought a
little bit harder about what they were
looking at and they were a little bit
more curious and their curiosity changed
the way people thought about the world
and thus it changed the world they
changed the world and so can you thank
you